add ADR for auth CRD (#70)
opendatahub-io/architecture-decision-records: architecture-decision-records/operator/ODH-ADR-Operator-0007-auth-crd.md

<!-- copy and paste this template to start authoring your own ADR -->
<!-- for the Status of new ADRs, please use Approved, since it will be approved by the time it is merged -->
<!-- remove this comment block too -->

|                |            |
| -------------- | ---------- |
| Date           | 22-10-2024 |
| Scope          | Open Data Hub Operator |
| Status         | In-review |
| Authors        | [Steven Tobin](@StevenTobin) |
| Supersedes     | N/A |
| Superseded by: | N/A |
| Tickets        | [RHAOIENG-14807](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHOAIENG-14807)|
| Other docs:    | none |

## What

This document outlines the decision to implement an auth CRD in ODH.

## Why

There is a growing need for the ODH operator to handle authentication for the platform. OIDC is not handled gracefully over the entire system, and there are use cases where individual components are handling auth individually which those components would like to move away from. Centralising auth concerns will simplify the architecture of auth features, security and ease of use of these features for users.

## Goals

* Define a new auth CRD.

## Non-Goals

## How

> A new API is added to the operator in the form of an *DSCAuth* (Naming to be decided) CRD. This will initially handle a list of adminGroups which the operator will reconcile for access to dashboard UIs and applying requisite openshift permissions. This is intended to be the canonical place for auth configuration for future auth initiatives.

Reviewer: Will this be something that will only be included when Dashboard component is enabled?

If not, should this instead be an internal api with configuration fields exposed in DSCI?

## Open Questions

> * Naming of the new CRD.

Reviewer 2: In order to move forward with this ADR, it would be best to have a decision on the name of the CRD, and a definition of the structure. Also, can you add some information on how the components would then leverage the CRD to overcome the current deficiencies?

# Open Data Hub - Architecture Decision Record template

<!-- copy and paste this template to start authoring your own ADR -->
<!-- for the Status of new ADRs, please use Approved, since it will be approved by the time it is merged -->
<!-- remove this comment block too -->

|                |            |
| -------------- | ---------- |
| Date           | 22-10-2024 |
| Scope          | Open Data Hub Operator |
| Status         | In-review |
| Authors        | [Steven Tobin](@StevenTobin) |
| Supersedes     | N/A |
| Superseded by: | N/A |
| Tickets        | [RHAOIENG-14807](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHOAIENG-14807)|
| Other docs:    | none |

## What

This document outlines the decision to implement an auth CRD in ODH.

## Why

> There is a growing need for the ODH operator to handle authentication for the platform. OIDC is not handled gracefully over the entire system, and there are use cases where individual components are handling auth individually which those components would like to move away from. Centralising auth concerns will simplify the architecture of auth features, security and ease of use of these features for users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is a growing need for the ODH operator to provide centralized authentication and authorization services for the platform.  The near term needs are :

-  Add support for managing user groups. Currently this  is  managed by the Dashboard component and needs to be centralized.
-  Prepare for upcoming for changes to handle OCP Platform support for external OIDC authentication

Longer term,  this API and its controller will be enhanced to handle additional RBAC configuration currently handled in the Dashboard component, such as creating roles and role bindings.

Centralising auth concerns will simplify the architecture of auth features, security and ease of use of these features for users.

```

## Goals

* Define a new auth CRD.

## Non-Goals

## How

A new API is added to the operator in the form of an auth CRD in the services api group. This will initially handle a list of adminGroups which the operator will reconcile for access to dashboard UIs and applying requisite openshift permissions. This is intended to be the canonical place for auth configuration for future auth initiatives.

An example of the CR:
```
apiVersion: services.opendatahub.io/v1alpha1
kind: Auth
metadata:
    name: odhAuth
spec:
    adminGroups: []
```

> ## Open Questions

Reviewer 3: Can we add discussions here about how we migrate/upgrade current dashboard implementation?
Do we deprecate  Dashboard userGroups over some period, or do we just switch right away given the Dashboard config API is alpha? 
@andrewballantyne

Reviewer 4: @csams and I were talking about that. I would recommend a cold turkey switchover; it's alpha on our side, so I don't imagine we have a reliance here in our support to migrate slowly... but I don't know how we can cleanly do that tbh. 

The cold turkey approach is done like so (I would guess):
* Upgrade available
* User invokes / auto upgrade invokes
* Operator would need to create new location (likely a new CRD & CR? or maybe just a CRD field in DSCI or something?)
* Copy the data from OdhDashboardConfig over
* Invoke Component upgrade (Dashboard at least)
* Dashboard CRD drops the field -- the CR loses the values
* We are upgraded

If the order is not pretty much what is above (given infrastructures of the operator today) then I imagine we need to slowly migrate over release(s) and I imagine many (EUS/Stable/Fast all need to have 1 with the migration effort).

cc @etirelli FYI

Author: I added some text around the upgrade strategy we discussed in a seperate meeting.

-  Add support for managing user groups. Currently this  is  managed by the Dashboard component and needs to be centralized.
-  Prepare for upcoming for changes to handle OCP Platform support for external OIDC authentication

Longer term,  this API and its controller will be enhanced to handle additional RBAC configuration currently handled in the Dashboard component, such as creating roles and role bindings.

Centralising auth concerns will simplify the architecture of auth features, security and ease of use of these features for users.

## Goals

* Define a new auth CRD.

## Non-Goals

## How

A new API is added to the operator in the form of an auth CRD in the services api group. This will initially handle a list of adminGroups which the operator will reconcile for access to dashboard UIs and applying requisite openshift permissions. This is intended to be the canonical place for auth configuration for future auth initiatives.

An example of the CR:
```
apiVersion: services.opendatahub.io/v1alpha1
kind: Auth
metadata:
    name: odhAuth
spec:
    adminGroups: []

> ```

Reviewer 4: You don't speak to it here -- is this a singleton like DSC and DSCI or would they create multiple? If they can, is there any benefit today for that or is that for "future use-cases"?

Author: Yep, this is intended to be a singleton, I've added that to the ADR now.

| -------------- | ---------- |
| Date           | 22-10-2024 |
| Scope          | Open Data Hub Operator |
| Status         | In-review |
| Authors        | [Steven Tobin](@StevenTobin) |
| Supersedes     | N/A |
| Superseded by: | N/A |
| Tickets        | [RHAOIENG-14807](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHOAIENG-14807)|
| Other docs:    | none |

## What

This document outlines the decision to implement an auth CRD in ODH.

## Why

There is a growing need for the ODH operator to provide centralized authentication and authorization services for the platform.  The near term needs are :

-  Add support for managing user groups. Currently this  is  managed by the Dashboard component and needs to be centralized.
-  Prepare for upcoming for changes to handle OCP Platform support for external OIDC authentication

Longer term,  this API and its controller will be enhanced to handle additional RBAC configuration currently handled in the Dashboard component, such as creating roles and role bindings.

Centralising auth concerns will simplify the architecture of auth features, security and ease of use of these features for users.

## Goals

* Define a new auth CRD.

## Non-Goals

## How

> A new  API is added to the operator in the form of an auth CRD in the services api group. This will initially handle a list of adminGroups which the operator will reconcile for access to dashboard UIs and applying requisite openshift permissions. This is intended to be the canonical place for auth configuration for future auth initiatives.

Reviewer 5: A comment below mentions disabling the ability to edit the dash config stanza that I think includes both admin group and allowed groups.  Are we doing both?

Author: Good point. I've made it more explicit.

The Auth CR is a singleton like the DSC and DSCi CRs.

An example of the CR:
```
apiVersion: services.opendatahub.io/v1alpha1

> kind: Auth

Reviewer 5: @lphiri @etirelli Should we combine authn and authz concerns in this CR, or should we separate them and give this one a more specific name like `Authz` or `Authorization`?

Reviewer 5: If we keep the 1 CR, maybe namespace the authn/z concerns beneath the spec: `spec.authn`, `spec.authz`.

Author: A single CR for both authz and authn would make more sense I think than seperating them, and namespacing like you point out makes it clearer which setting in the CR relates to which concern.

I would agree for futureproofing.

metadata:
    name: odhAuth
spec:

>     adminGroups: []

Reviewer 5: Let's include the allowedGroups from dashboard config in the example just so the intent is explicit if we're going to disable it in their CR.

Author: :+1:  good point. I've added that.

-  Add support for managing user groups. Currently this  is  managed by the Dashboard component and needs to be centralized.
-  Prepare for upcoming for changes to handle OCP Platform support for external OIDC authentication

Longer term,  this API and its controller will be enhanced to handle additional RBAC configuration currently handled in the Dashboard component, such as creating roles and role bindings.

Centralising auth concerns will simplify the architecture of auth features, security and ease of use of these features for users.

## Goals

* Define a new auth CRD.

## Non-Goals

## How

A new  API is added to the operator in the form of an auth CRD in the services api group. This will initially handle a list of adminGroups and allowedGroups (migrated from the groupsConfig field of the dashboardConfig) which the operator will reconcile for access to dashboard UIs and applying requisite openshift permissions. This is intended to be the canonical place for auth configuration for future auth initiatives.

The Auth CR is a singleton like the DSC and DSCi CRs.

An example of the CR:
```

> apiVersion: services.opendatahub.io/v1alpha1

Reviewer 6: after the lastest change this should be updated to 
`apiVersion: services.platform.opendatahub.io/v1alpha1`
